Proposal "Allow to change permissions behavior on extension updates" (#798)
hober/web-extensions: proposals/permissions_behavior_on_update.md

It’s not always possible to know the product's future state and predict all use cases in advance.

If the extension is already live, there is no good way to add a new mandatory permission. The install time permission with “warning” will silently “turn off” the extension, but “optional_permission” will lead to a suboptimal experience for new installs. During a fresh install, users must agree on permissions during the installation process and immediately receive a pop-up requesting additional optional permission. 

**It would be great to have a way to enable developers to use new permissions but avoid unexpected consequences. This will simplify/streamline the onboarding of browser extensions for new users by offering upfront notice of permissions required to use new extension features.**

### Known Consumers

Changes listed in this proposal will enable well-established extensions to introduce new features to users that require additional permissions without the risk of accidentally disabling the extension, but at the same time, it will help avoid confusing new users with a suboptimal permission request flow immediately after installation.

## Specification

### Schema

> The permissions' granting behavior only changes when "permissions_behavior_on_update" is set to "defer" and only for new permissions that may trigger a warning during the update. It doesn't change the behavior of permissions that don't trigger a warning or all permissions during install time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The permissions' granting behavior only changes when `permissions_behavior_on_update` is set to `defer` and only for new permissions that may trigger a warning during the update. It doesn't change the behavior of permissions that don't trigger a warning or all permissions during install time.
```

> 

Reviewer: We should add the keywords `auto` and consider adding the keyword `prompt` (chrome behaviour)

Author: Make sense! I added an "auto" value to the proposal.

When the "permissions_behavior_on_update" is absent from the manifest, the behavior remains the same as it is right now, and new permissions with a warning will turn off the extension during the update or stop updates until the user explicitly approves it (behavior varies across browsers).

### Suppress permissions warning on update

> In case "permissions_behavior_on_update" is set to "defer", then any new permission that triggers a "warning" isn't granted but instead should be explicitly requested within a user gesture using "permissions.request"(https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/permissions/request). Expect that user may decline permission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case `permissions_behavior_on_update` is set to `defer`, then any new permission that triggers a "warning" isn't granted but instead should be explicitly requested within a user gesture using "permissions.request"(https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Mozilla/Add-ons/WebExtensions/API/permissions/request). Expect that user may decline permission.
```

```
document.querySelector('#my-button').addEventListener('click', (event) => {
  // Permissions must be requested from inside a user gesture, like a button's
  // click handler.
  browser.permissions.request({
    permissions: ['tabs'],
    origins: ['https://www.google.com/']
  }, (granted) => {
    // The callback argument will be true if the user granted the permissions.
    if (granted) {
      doSomething();
    } else {
      doSomethingElse();
    }
  });
});
```

> Once permission is granted, it behaves like a regular non-optional "permission" and cannot be removed with "permissions.remove". Once "permissions.remove" is called, then “false” will be returned, and an exception will be printed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once permission is granted, it behaves like a regular non-optional "permission" and cannot be removed with `permissions.remove()`. Once `permissions.remove()` is called, then `false` will be returned, and an exception will be printed.
```

```js
{
  name: "Demo extension",
  version: '0.0.2',
  permissions: [
    "<permission_that_triggers_a_warning>"
  ],
  permissions_behavior_on_update: "defer"
}
```

2. The new version 0.0.3 removes `permissions_behavior_on_update`, but adds a new "permission_without_warning". In this case, the extension will be successfully updated, and "permission_without_warning" will be granted, however, "permission_that_triggers_a_warning" remains suppressed and needs an explicit request to be used.

```js
{
  name: "Demo extension",
  version: '0.0.3',
  permissions: [
    "<permission_that_triggers_a_warning>",
    "<permission_without_warning>"
  ]
}
```

### What if extension was already turned off due to the permission "warning", but updates to a new version with "permissions_behavior_on_update" set to "defer"

<TODO>

### Behavior

> When "permissions_behavior_on_update" is set to "defer", then for existing installs (extension update flow), nothing should be requested. However, the extension should be able check and request new permission on runtime. Otherwise, permissions granting behavior remains the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `permissions_behavior_on_update` is set to `defer`, then for existing installs (extension update flow), nothing should be requested. However, the extension should be able check and request new permission on runtime. Otherwise, permissions granting behavior remains the same.
```

### New Permissions

The proposal does not introduce any new permissions. However, it does introduce a new behavior for requesting existing permissions. 

### Manifest File Changes

> Add a new property, "permissions_behavior_on_update," to the manifest to alter the newly added "permissions" behavior during the extension's update. When set to "defer," newly added permissions on update won't be granted by default; they will behave like optional permissions and must be explicitly requested by the extension. Also, the default browser behavior will NOT be applied (warning, turn off, stop further updates, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a new property, "permissions_behavior_on_update," to the manifest to alter the newly added "permissions" behavior during the extension's update. When set to `defer`, newly added permissions on update won't be granted by default; they will behave like optional permissions and must be explicitly requested by the extension. Also, the default browser behavior will NOT be applied (warning, turn off, stop further updates, etc.).
```

The new behavior isn't applicable during install time or for permission that doesn't trigger a warning.

Extension manifest file example:

```json
{
  "permissions_behavior_on_update": "defer"
}
```

## Security and Privacy

### Exposed Sensitive Data

This proposal doesn't change the existing browser API or expose PII data.

### Abuse Mitigations

The proposal doesn't introduce any additional possibilities for abuse. For already installed extensions, newly added permissions behave like optional ones that should be explicitly requested.

### Additional Security Considerations

> N/A

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without `permissions_behavior_on_update="defer"`, security can be at risk by either keeping extensions on older extension versions or by accidentality removing important security/privacy extensions.
```

Author: Good catch! Thank you!

# Proposal: Allow to change permissions behavior on extension updates

**Proposal Summary**

> Add a new property, `permissions_behavior.updates`, to the manifest to specify how browsers should act when extension updates introduce new `permissions`. When set to `defer`, new permissions will behave as if specified in `optional_permissions` for existing. They are not requested or granted on update thus must be explicitly requested by the extension. The default browser behavior will NOT be applied (warning, turn off, stop further updates, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a new property, `permissions_behavior.updates`, to the manifest to specify how browsers should act when extension updates introduce new `permissions` and `host_permissions`. When set to `defer`, new permissions will behave as if specified in `optional_permissions` for existing. They are not requested or granted on update thus must be explicitly requested by the extension. The default browser behavior will NOT be applied (warning, turn off, stop further updates, etc.).
```

- [Proposal for "Hybrid Permissions"](https://github.com/w3c/webextensions/pull/788)

## Motivation

### Glossary

The phrase "permissions that trigger warnings" refers to permissions that require additional action from the user after the extension's update. The actual UX varies across browsers; some may silently turn off the extension, while others display an extra warning or pause further extension updates until the user explicitly permits the added permission.

### Objective

Today, developers have two options for adding [new permissions that trigger warnings](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/develop/concepts/permission-warnings):

1. Add a new permission as install-time permission which will disable the extension for 100% of current users or stop further updates until they take manual steps to grant the new permission. This is not a viable option for extension with large user install bases, as [The UI for re-approval of such permission is very unclear](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/develop/concepts/permission-warnings), and in most cases, it means a loss of most active users.

> On the manifest-files level, it's a "permissions" property that represents a list of permissions the user agreed upon installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the manifest-files level, the "permissions" and "host_permissions" properties represent a list of permissions the user agreed upon installation.
```

2. Add new permissions as 'optional,' which will limit access to new features until the user grants access to the new permission.  <—  This is not optimal as it creates a confusing experience for new users who reviewed and accepted permissions a few seconds earlier while installing the extension.

> On the manifest-files level, it's an "optional_permissions" property that represents a list of permissions that the extension may request at any point, and the user agrees or declines them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the manifest-files level, the "optional_permissions" and "optional_host_permissions" properties represent a list of permissions that the extension may request at any point, and the user agrees or declines them.
```

> # Proposal: Allow to change permissions behavior on extension's update

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Proposal: Allow to change permissions behavior on extension updates
```

** Proposal Summary**

> Add a new property, "permissions_behavior_on_update," to the manifest to alter the newly added "permissions" behavior during the extension's update. When set to "defer," newly added permissions on update won't be granted by default; they will behave like optional permissions and must be explicitly requested by the extension. Also, the default browser behavior will NOT be applied (warning, turn off, stop further updates, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add a new property, `permissions_behavior_on_update`, to the manifest to specify how browsers should act when extension updates introduce new `permissions`. When set to `defer`, new permissions will behave as if specified in `optional_permissions` for existing. They are not requested or granted on update thus must be explicitly requested by the extension. The default browser behavior will NOT be applied (warning, turn off, stop further updates, etc.).
```

> The new behavior isn't applicable during install time or for permission that doesn't trigger a warning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new behavior is not applicable during install time or for permissions that do not trigger a warning.
```

Extension manifest file example:

```json
{

>   "permissions_behavior_on_update": "defer"

Reviewer: Probably disregard; however want to mention it, we could be further future-proofed by making it an object.
```json
{
  "permissions_behavior": {
    "updates": "defer",
  }
}
```

allowing other types of permission behaviours we might want to introduce in the future.
